docs/ADVANCED.md, before:

[**Documentation**](https://github.com/Byaidu/PDFMathTranslate) > **Advanced Usage** _(current)_

---

<h3 id="toc">Table of Contents</h3>

- [Full / partial translation](#partial)
- [Specify source and target languages](#language)
- [Translate with different services](#services)
- [Translate wih exceptions](#exceptions)
- [Multi-threads](#threads)
- [Custom prompt](#prompt)

---

<h3 id="partial">Full / partial translation</h3>

- Entire document

  ```bash
  pdf2zh example.pdf
  ```

- Part of the document

  ```bash
  pdf2zh example.pdf -p 1-3,5
  ```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="language">Specify source and target languages</h3>

See [Google Languages Codes](https://developers.google.com/admin-sdk/directory/v1/languages), [DeepL Languages Codes](https://developers.deepl.com/docs/resources/supported-languages)

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -li en -lo ja
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="services">Translate with different services</h3>

We've provided a detailed table on the required [environment variables](https://chatgpt.com/share/6734a83d-9d48-800e-8a46-f57ca6e8bcb4) for each translation service. Make sure to set them before using the respective service.

| **Translator**       | **Service**    | **Environment Variables**                                             | **Default Values**                                       | **Notes**                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| -------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Google (Default)** | `google`       | None                                                                  | N/A                                                      | None                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| **Bing**             | `bing`         | None                                                                  | N/A                                                      | None                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| **DeepL**            | `deepl`        | `DEEPL_AUTH_KEY`                                                      | `[Your Key]`                                             | See [DeepL](https://support.deepl.com/hc/en-us/articles/360020695820-API-Key-for-DeepL-s-API)                                                                                                             |
| **DeepLX**           | `deeplx`       | `DEEPLX_ENDPOINT`                                                     | `https://api.deepl.com/translate`                        | See [DeepLX](https://github.com/OwO-Network/DeepLX)                                                                                                                                                       |
| **Ollama**           | `ollama`       | `OLLAMA_HOST`, `OLLAMA_MODEL`                                         | `http://127.0.0.1:11434`, `gemma2`                       | See [Ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama)                                                                                                                                                            |
| **OpenAI**           | `openai`       | `OPENAI_BASE_URL`, `OPENAI_API_KEY`, `OPENAI_MODEL`                   | `https://api.openai.com/v1`, `[Your Key]`, `gpt-4o-mini` | See [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/overview)                                                                                                                                                   |
| **AzureOpenAI**      | `azure-openai` | `AZURE_OPENAI_BASE_URL`, `AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY`, `AZURE_OPENAI_MODEL` | `[Your Endpoint]`, `[Your Key]`, `gpt-4o-mini`           | See [Azure OpenAI](https://learn.microsoft.com/zh-cn/azure/ai-services/openai/chatgpt-quickstart?tabs=command-line%2Cjavascript-keyless%2Ctypescript-keyless%2Cpython&pivots=programming-language-python) |
| **Zhipu**            | `zhipu`        | `ZHIPU_API_KEY`, `ZHIPU_MODEL`                                        | `[Your Key]`, `glm-4-flash`                              | See [Zhipu](https://open.bigmodel.cn/dev/api/thirdparty-frame/openai-sdk)                                                                                                                                 |
| **ModelScope**       | `ModelScope`   | `MODELSCOPE_API_KEY`, `MODELSCOPE_MODEL`                              | `[Your Key]`, `Qwen/Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct`          | See [ModelScope](https://www.modelscope.cn/docs/model-service/API-Inference/intro)                                                                                                                        |
| **Silicon**          | `silicon`      | `SILICON_API_KEY`, `SILICON_MODEL`                                    | `[Your Key]`, `Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct`                 | See [SiliconCloud](https://docs.siliconflow.cn/quickstart)                                                                                                                                                |
| **Gemini**           | `gemini`       | `GEMINI_API_KEY`, `GEMINI_MODEL`                                      | `[Your Key]`, `gemini-1.5-flash`                         | See [Gemini](https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/openai)                                                                                                                                                |
| **Azure**            | `azure`        | `AZURE_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_API_KEY`                                     | `https://api.translator.azure.cn`, `[Your Key]`          | See [Azure](https://docs.azure.cn/en-us/ai-services/translator/text-translation-overview)                                                                                                                 |
| **Tencent**          | `tencent`      | `TENCENTCLOUD_SECRET_ID`, `TENCENTCLOUD_SECRET_KEY`                   | `[Your ID]`, `[Your Key]`                                | See [Tencent](https://www.tencentcloud.com/products/tmt?from_qcintl=122110104)                                                                                                                            |
| **Dify**             | `dify`         | `DIFY_API_URL`, `DIFY_API_KEY`                                        | `[Your DIFY URL]`, `[Your Key]`                          | See [Dify](https://github.com/langgenius/dify),Three variables, lang_out, lang_in, and text, need to be defined in Dify's workflow input.                                                                 |
| **AnythingLLM**      | `anythingllm`  | `AnythingLLM_URL`, `AnythingLLM_APIKEY`                               | `[Your AnythingLLM URL]`, `[Your Key]`                   | See [anything-llm](https://github.com/Mintplex-Labs/anything-llm)                                                                                                                                         |

Use `-s service` or `-s service:model` to specify service:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -s openai:gpt-4o-mini
```

Or specify model with environment variables:

```bash
set OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-4o-mini
pdf2zh example.pdf -s openai
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="exceptions">Translate wih exceptions</h3>

Use regex to specify formula fonts and characters that need to be preserved:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -f "(CM[^RT].*|MS.*|.*Ital)" -c "(\(|\||\)|\+|=|\d|[\u0080-\ufaff])"
```

Preserve `Latex`, `Mono`, `Code`, `Italic`, `Symbol` and `Math` fonts by default:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -f "(CM[^R]|(MS|XY|MT|BL|RM|EU|LA|RS)[A-Z]|LINE|LCIRCLE|TeX-|rsfs|txsy|wasy|stmary|.*Mono|.*Code|.*Ital|.*Sym|.*Math)"
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="threads">Multi-threads</h3>

Use `-t` to specify how many threads to use in translation:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -t 1
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="prompt">Custom prompt</h3>

Use `--prompt` to specify which prompt to use in llm:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -pr prompt.txt
```

example prompt.txt

```
[
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": "You are a professional,authentic machine translation engine.",
    },
    {
        "role": "user",
        "content": "Translate the following markdown source text to ${lang_out}. Keep the formula notation {{v*}} unchanged. Output translation directly without any additional text.\nSource Text: ${text}\nTranslated Text:",
    },
]
```

In custom prompt file, there are three variables can be used.
|**variables**|**comment**|
|-|-|
|`lang_in`|input language|
|`lang_out`|output language|
|`text`|text need to be translated|

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

Commit message:

Support multiple models in OLLAMA_MODEL
Update `OLLAMA_MODEL` to support multiple models separated by `;` and handle timeouts.

* **`pdf2zh/translator.py`**:
  - Modify `OllamaTranslator` class to split `OLLAMA_MODEL` by `;` and handle multiple models.
  - Implement logic to try the next model on timeout and raise an error if all models timeout.

* **`docs/ADVANCED.md`**:
  - Add documentation on specifying multiple models for `OLLAMA_MODEL` using `;`.

---

For more details, open the [Copilot Workspace session](https://copilot-workspace.githubnext.com/7shi/PDFMathTranslate?shareId=XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX).

docs/ADVANCED.md, after:

[**Documentation**](https://github.com/Byaidu/PDFMathTranslate) > **Advanced Usage** _(current)_

---

<h3 id="toc">Table of Contents</h3>

- [Full / partial translation](#partial)
- [Specify source and target languages](#language)
- [Translate with different services](#services)
- [Translate wih exceptions](#exceptions)
- [Multi-threads](#threads)
- [Custom prompt](#prompt)

---

<h3 id="partial">Full / partial translation</h3>

- Entire document

  ```bash
  pdf2zh example.pdf
  ```

- Part of the document

  ```bash
  pdf2zh example.pdf -p 1-3,5
  ```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="language">Specify source and target languages</h3>

See [Google Languages Codes](https://developers.google.com/admin-sdk/directory/v1/languages), [DeepL Languages Codes](https://developers.deepl.com/docs/resources/supported-languages)

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -li en -lo ja
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="services">Translate with different services</h3>

We've provided a detailed table on the required [environment variables](https://chatgpt.com/share/6734a83d-9d48-800e-8a46-f57ca6e8bcb4) for each translation service. Make sure to set them before using the respective service.

| **Translator**       | **Service**    | **Environment Variables**                                             | **Default Values**                                       | **Notes**                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| -------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Google (Default)** | `google`       | None                                                                  | N/A                                                      | None                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| **Bing**             | `bing`         | None                                                                  | N/A                                                      | None                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| **DeepL**            | `deepl`        | `DEEPL_AUTH_KEY`                                                      | `[Your Key]`                                             | See [DeepL](https://support.deepl.com/hc/en-us/articles/360020695820-API-Key-for-DeepL-s-API)                                                                                                             |
| **DeepLX**           | `deeplx`       | `DEEPLX_ENDPOINT`                                                     | `https://api.deepl.com/translate`                        | See [DeepLX](https://github.com/OwO-Network/DeepLX)                                                                                                                                                       |
| **Ollama**           | `ollama`       | `OLLAMA_HOST`, `OLLAMA_MODEL`                                         | `http://127.0.0.1:11434`, `gemma2`                       | See [Ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama)                                                                                                                                                            |
| **OpenAI**           | `openai`       | `OPENAI_BASE_URL`, `OPENAI_API_KEY`, `OPENAI_MODEL`                   | `https://api.openai.com/v1`, `[Your Key]`, `gpt-4o-mini` | See [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/overview)                                                                                                                                                   |
| **AzureOpenAI**      | `azure-openai` | `AZURE_OPENAI_BASE_URL`, `AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY`, `AZURE_OPENAI_MODEL` | `[Your Endpoint]`, `[Your Key]`, `gpt-4o-mini`           | See [Azure OpenAI](https://learn.microsoft.com/zh-cn/azure/ai-services/openai/chatgpt-quickstart?tabs=command-line%2Cjavascript-keyless%2Ctypescript-keyless%2Cpython&pivots=programming-language-python) |
| **Zhipu**            | `zhipu`        | `ZHIPU_API_KEY`, `ZHIPU_MODEL`                                        | `[Your Key]`, `glm-4-flash`                              | See [Zhipu](https://open.bigmodel.cn/dev/api/thirdparty-frame/openai-sdk)                                                                                                                                 |
| **ModelScope**       | `ModelScope`   | `MODELSCOPE_API_KEY`, `MODELSCOPE_MODEL`                              | `[Your Key]`, `Qwen/Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct`          | See [ModelScope](https://www.modelscope.cn/docs/model-service/API-Inference/intro)                                                                                                                        |
| **Silicon**          | `silicon`      | `SILICON_API_KEY`, `SILICON_MODEL`                                    | `[Your Key]`, `Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct`                 | See [SiliconCloud](https://docs.siliconflow.cn/quickstart)                                                                                                                                                |
| **Gemini**           | `gemini`       | `GEMINI_API_KEY`, `GEMINI_MODEL`                                      | `[Your Key]`, `gemini-1.5-flash`                         | See [Gemini](https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/openai)                                                                                                                                                |
| **Azure**            | `azure`        | `AZURE_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_API_KEY`                                     | `https://api.translator.azure.cn`, `[Your Key]`          | See [Azure](https://docs.azure.cn/en-us/ai-services/translator/text-translation-overview)                                                                                                                 |
| **Tencent**          | `tencent`      | `TENCENTCLOUD_SECRET_ID`, `TENCENTCLOUD_SECRET_KEY`                   | `[Your ID]`, `[Your Key]`                                | See [Tencent](https://www.tencentcloud.com/products/tmt?from_qcintl=122110104)                                                                                                                            |
| **Dify**             | `dify`         | `DIFY_API_URL`, `DIFY_API_KEY`                                        | `[Your DIFY URL]`, `[Your Key]`                          | See [Dify](https://github.com/langgenius/dify),Three variables, lang_out, lang_in, and text, need to be defined in Dify's workflow input.                                                                 |
| **AnythingLLM**      | `anythingllm`  | `AnythingLLM_URL`, `AnythingLLM_APIKEY`                               | `[Your AnythingLLM URL]`, `[Your Key]`                   | See [anything-llm](https://github.com/Mintplex-Labs/anything-llm)                                                                                                                                         |

Use `-s service` or `-s service:model` to specify service:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -s openai:gpt-4o-mini
```

Or specify model with environment variables:

```bash
set OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-4o-mini
pdf2zh example.pdf -s openai
```

To specify multiple models for `OLLAMA_MODEL`, separate them with `;`:

```bash
set OLLAMA_MODEL=gemma2;aya-expanse
pdf2zh example.pdf -s ollama
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="exceptions">Translate wih exceptions</h3>

Use regex to specify formula fonts and characters that need to be preserved:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -f "(CM[^RT].*|MS.*|.*Ital)" -c "(\(|\||\)|\+|=|\d|[\u0080-\ufaff])"
```

Preserve `Latex`, `Mono`, `Code`, `Italic`, `Symbol` and `Math` fonts by default:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -f "(CM[^R]|(MS|XY|MT|BL|RM|EU|LA|RS)[A-Z]|LINE|LCIRCLE|TeX-|rsfs|txsy|wasy|stmary|.*Mono|.*Code|.*Ital|.*Sym|.*Math)"
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="threads">Multi-threads</h3>

Use `-t` to specify how many threads to use in translation:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -t 1
```

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---

<h3 id="prompt">Custom prompt</h3>

Use `--prompt` to specify which prompt to use in llm:

```bash
pdf2zh example.pdf -pr prompt.txt
```

example prompt.txt

```
[
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": "You are a professional,authentic machine translation engine.",
    },
    {
        "role": "user",
        "content": "Translate the following markdown source text to ${lang_out}. Keep the formula notation {{v*}} unchanged. Output translation directly without any additional text.\nSource Text: ${text}\nTranslated Text:",
    },
]
```

In custom prompt file, there are three variables can be used.
|**variables**|**comment**|
|-|-|
|`lang_in`|input language|
|`lang_out`|output language|
|`text`|text need to be translated|

[⬆️ Back to top](#toc)

---
